As a cybersecurity entrepreneur, I am a big believer in Professor Lessig’s quote on “Code is law” which can be interpreted in many ways, but Lessig argues that there are actually four major regulators (Law, Norms, Market, Architecture) and ultimately, it’s the responsibility of the developer to come up with better solutions to tackle privacy. So, Big Tech data privacy in my opinion is one of the strongest when compared to counterparts such as EU, China, LATAM, etc. I would like to present some evidence to prove my belief.

The right to privacy is protected under the Privacy Act of 1974, but this Act applies solely to governmental agencies. Relationships between private parties are left on their own to follow freedom to contract provisions and limits. Only certain specific sectors and activities, such as healthcare and credit reporting, face more stringent federal regulation or specific state statutes.

Privacy begins with the Fourth Amendment to the American Constitution, whereby the right to privacy is the right against unlawful searches and seizures, protection from state invasion in the sanctity of their own homes, or wherever else individuals have ‘reasonable expectations of privacy, And as we discussed in Class, GDPR, CCPA is just the beginning of how lawmakers are overhauling the way corporate protects and utilizes consumers personal data. [1]

The CCPA has inspired the introduction of the consumer privacy legislation in several states, including Connecticut, Hawaii, Maryland, Massachusetts, Rhode Island, and Texas. Some of the state bills would go beyond the CCPA, such as by authorizing private lawsuits by individuals for all violations of the privacy law, not just data breaches.[2]

This approach is influenced and guided by the important values of consumer choice and fairness. Privacy can be understood in many ways, and, as we know it, lacks a single definition. Thus, privacy can be viewed as part of fairness and as a reflection of consumer choice. But privacy is also a quality component. Adopting this broader approach to consumer welfare with a privacy dimension may mean going back to the origins of ordoliberal thinking and more strongly embracing consumer choice as a guiding policy principle or goal.[3]

Finally, Intel, one of the big tech, has put forth its own draft bill called the innovative and ethical data to Act, and invited comments from the public and privacy experts, during and after covid-19 there very many congressional hearings which is now televised to raise public awareness of the issue of privacy and the nuances of comprehensive privacy law. CDPA, proposed by senator Wyden would add fines and even incarceration for the company executives who misuse Americans' private information. [4]

The U.S. is moving towards a comprehensive federal privacy law, It starts from Big tech recognizing its role and US lawmakers can add value to the law through cases and enforcement actions leading to greater efficiency and consistency.

[1]Christopher Kuner. Transborder Data Flows and Data Privacy Law. Vol. First edition, OUP Oxford, 2013. EBSCOhost, search-ebscohost-com.proxy.uchicago.edu/login.aspx?direct=true&db=e000xna&AN=593146&site=eds-live&scope=site.

[2]Rothstein, M. A., & Tovino, S. A. (2019). California Takes the Lead on Data Privacy Law. The Hastings Center Report, 49(5), 4–5. https://doi-org.proxy.uchicago.edu/10.1002/hast.1042

[3]Maria Wasastjerna. Competition, Data and Privacy in the Digital Economy : Towards a Privacy Dimension in Competition Policy? Kluwer Law International, 2020.

[4]Jamison, S. G. (2019). Creating national data privacy law for the united states. Cybaris: An Intellectual Property Law Review, 10(1), 1-40.
